>> Sreenivasan: FOR A SECOND
STRAIGHT DAY, A DEADLY BLAST
RATTLED THE RUSSIAN CITY OF
VOLGOGRAD.
STOKING SECURITY FEARS IN A
COUNTRY THAT WILL HOST THE
WINTER OLYMPICS IN JUST SIX
WEEKS' TIME.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
GWEN IFILL AND JUDY WOODRUFF ARE
BOTH ON HOLIDAY.
ALSO AHEAD, AUTHOR AND
JOURNALIST DAVID IGNATIUS, JUST
BACK FROM A VISIT TO IRAN.
DETAILS REACTION INSIDEHE T
COUNTRY TO THE NUCLEAR TALKS.
>> I ASKED THIS HARD LINE
PERSON CLOSE TO THE LEADER,
GO DID YOU THINK COMPROMISE
IS POSSIBLE ON THE NUCLEAR
DEAL AND HE ANSWERED
DIRECTLY NO, I DON'T THINK
IT IS.
>> Sreenivasan: PLUS, THE YEAR'S
BIG SCIENCE NEWS.
FROM SPACE EXPLORATION.
TO THE FIGHT AGAINST CANCER.
AND MOUNTING CONCERNS OVER
CLIMATE CHANGE.
>> WE REACHED THIS KIND OF
UNFORTUNATE MILESTONE, 400
PARTS PER MILLION OF CAR
DONE-- CARBON DIOXIDE.
AND THAT NUMBER IS SOMETHING
THIS PLANET HAS NOT SEEN IN
MILLIONS OF YEARS, NOT IN
RECORDED HISTORY.
>> Sreenivasan: THOSE ARE JUST
SOME OF THE STORIES WE'RE
COVERING ON TONIGHT'S "PBS
NEWSHOUR."
>> Sreenivasan: THE DEATH TOLL
REACHED 31 TODAY IN THE RUSSIAN
CITY OF VOLGOGRAD, AFTER THE
SECOND SUICIDE BOMBING IN AS
MANY DAYS.
THE FIRST CAME SUNDAY AT THE
CITY'S MAIN TRAIN STATION.
THE ATTACKS RAISED NEW SECURITY
CONCERNS, JUST OVER A MONTH
BEFORE RUSSIA  PLAYS HOST TO THE
WINTER OLYMPICS.
WE'LL HEAR MOREN TH OE BOMBINGS
AND OLYMPIC SECURITY AFTER THIS
NEWS SUMMARY.
EAST AFRICAN NATIONS HAVE AGREED
TO  DEFEAT A REBEL LEADER IN
SOUTH SUDAN, IF HE REJECTS A
CEASE-FIRE.
THE PRESIDENT OF UGANDA
DELIVERED THAT MESSAGE DURING A
VISIT TO SOUTH SUDAN TODAY.
HE SAID NEIGHBORING STATES GAVE
REBEL LEADER RIEK MACHAR FOUR
DAYS TO RESPOND OR FACE A WIDER
CONFLICT.
MEANWHILE, THE U.N. ESTIMATED
TODAY THAT UP TO 180,000 PEOPLE
HAVE BEEN DISPLACED SINCE ETHNIC
CLASHES BEGAN IN MID-DECEMBER.
AT LEAST 1,000 OTHERS HAVE DIED.
NEW TROUBLE ERUPTED IN CONGO
TODAY.
THE STATE TELEVISION STATION,
AIRPORT AND MAIN MILITARY BASE
IN THE CAPITAL CITY, ALL CAME
UNDER ATTACK.
A GOVERNMENT SPOKESMAN IN
KINSHASA SAID THE ATTACKERS WERE
ARMED WITH MACHETES, STICKS AND
OTHER WEAPONS, BUT THEY WERE
DRIVEN BACK BY GOVERNMENT
TROOPS.
>> THE GOVERNMENT CALLS THE
POPULATION THE VICTIM OF
THIS TERRORIST ATTACK
BECAUSE THERE WERE SO FEW
ATTACKS AND WEAPONS, WE
THINK THEIR PURPOSE WAS TO
TERRORIZE THE PEOPLE ON THE
EVE OF NEW YEAR'S EVE
CELEBRATIONS WHICH ARE VERY
IMPORTANT IN OUR CULTURE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE GOVERNMENT
SAID THE ATTACKERS WERE
FOLLOWERS OF A SELF-STYLED
EVANGELICAL PROPHET.
THE ASSAULT TOUCHED OFF GUN
BATTLES THAT LEFT AT LEAST 40
PEOPLE DEAD.
IN WESTERN IRAQ, POLICE TORE
DOWN SUN ANI PROTEST CAMP TODAY
AFTER PROTESTERS AGREED TO END
THEIR MONTHS-LONG DEMONSTRATION.
THE CAMP WAS IN RAMADI, IN ANBAR
PROVINCE.
SUNNIS ERECTED IT TO PROTEST
WHAT THEY SEE AS DISCRIMINATION
BY THE SHIITE LED GOVERNMENT.
MEANWHILE, CLASHES NEAR THE SIT-
IN SITE
TODAY LEFT TEN PEOPLE DEAD,
INCLUDING GUNMEN AND
THREE POLICEMEN.
THE GOVERNMENT OF AFGHANISTAN
IS REJECTING A U.S. INTELLIGENCE
FINDING THAT MANY OF THE GAINS
THERE COULD BE LOST BY 2017.
IN KABUL TODAY, A SPOKESMAN FOR
PRESIDENT HAMID KARZAI CALLED
THE ASSESSMENT BASELESS.
THE NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
ESTIMATE IS THE WORK OF 16 U.S.
AGENCIES.
ALITSO SAYS AFGHANISTAN COULD
DESCEND INTO OUTRIGHT CHAOS IF
THERE'S NO AGREEMENT TO KEEP
SOME U.S. TROOPS BEYOND 2014.
THE LATEST ATTEMPT TO REACH A
RUSSIAN SHIP TRAPPED IN
ANTARCTIC ICE WAS CALLED OFF
TODAY, IN THE FACE OF A
BLIZZARD.
AN AUSTRALIAN ICEBREAKER HAD
BEEN SENT IN TO RESCUE 74 PEOPLE
WHO'VE BEEN STUCK ON BOARD THE
RUSSIAN VESSEL FOR A WEEK.
THE ICEBREAKER WAS ORDERED TO
TURN BACK DUE TO POOR
VISIBILITY.
THE ICEBREAKER PLANS TO RESUME
ITS MISSION AS SOON AS THE
WEATHER IMPROVES.
THE TEEN-AGER WHO ATTACKED A
DENVER-AREA HIGH SCHOOL MEANT TO
CLAIM MANY MORE VICTIMS THAN HE
DID.
AUTHORITIES GAVE THAT ASSESSMENT
OF 18-YEAR-OLD KARL PIERSON AT A
NEWS CONFERENCE TODAY.
PIERSON OPENED FIRE AT ARAPAHOE
COUNTY HIGH SCHOOL ON DECEMBER
13.
HE SHOT ONE STUDENT, WHO LATER
DIED OF HER WOUNDS, BEFORE
KILLING HIMSELF.
THE SHERIFF SAYS PIERSON HAD A
12-GAUGE SHOTGUN, THREE MOLOTOV
COCKTAILS, AND MORE THAN 125
ROUNDS OF AMMUNITION.
>> HIS INTENT WAS TO USE AS
MANY OF THOSE ROUNDS AS HE
POSSIBLY COULD.
AND USE THE MOLOTOV COCKTAILS
IN THE MOST DESTRUCTIVE
MANNER THAT HE WAS ABLE TO
DO.
HE WAS BENT ON EVIL.
AND HE WAS BENT ON CAUSING
THE LARGEST AMOUNT OF HARM
TO THE LARGEST NUMBER OF
PEOPLE THAT HE COULD
>> Sreenivasan: THE SHERIFF SAYS
PIERSON GOT IN THROUGH A DOOR
THAT WAS FREQUENTLY PROPPED
OPEN.
SIX STATES HAVE BEEN CHOSEN TO
DEVELOP TEST SITES FOR UNMANNED,
COMMERCIAL DRONES.
THE FEDERAL AVIATION
ADMINISTRATION ANNOUNCED TODAY
IT'S CHOSEN ALASKA, NEVADA, NEW
YORK, NORTH DAKOTA, TEXAS AND
VIRGINIA.
THEY'LL HOST RESEARCH SITES AND
TRY TO DEVELOP OPERATIONAL
GUIDELINES OVER THE NEXT TWO
YEARS.
THE F.A.A. PROJECTS 7,500
COMMERCIAL DRONES COULD BE
FLYING OVER THE U.S. WITHIN FIVE
YEARS AFTER GAINING WIDESPREAD
ACCESS TO THE AIR.
WALL STREET WAS RELATIVELY QUIET
ON THIS NEXT-TO-LAST TRADING DAY
OF THE YEAR.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
ROSE NEARLY 26 POINTS TO CLOSE
AT 16,504.
THE NASDAQ FELL TWO POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 4,154.
STILL TO COME ON THE EWSH"NOUR":
TWO BOMBINGS IN TWO DAYS FOR ONE
RUSSN CIIATY; HOW THE NUCLEAR
TALKS ARE PLAYING INSIDE IRAN;
THE FIGHT IN HAWAII OVER
GENETICALLY MODIFIED SEEDS;
MILES O'BRIEN ON THE YEAR'S BIG
SCIENCE NEWS.
PLUS, WHAT THE 2012 ELECTION
TELLS ABOUT 2014 AND POLITICS
MOVING FORWARD.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW BACK TO
RUSSIA, WHERE A PAIR OF BOMBINGS
HAVE ROCKED A CITY IN THE
COUNTRY'S SOUTHEAST THIS WEEK.
NO ONE HAS CLAIMED
RESPONSIBILITY IN THE ATTACKS
AND THERE ARE WORRIES THAT THEY
MAY INTENSIFY AS THE START OF
THE SOCCI WINTER OLYMPIC GAMES
COMES CLOSER.
BOMB TECHNICIANS AND
INVESTIGATORS IN VOLGOGRAD
COMBED THROUGH THE CHARRED
REMAINS OF A TROLLEY-CAR.
HOURS AFTER A SUICIDE BOMB
PACKED WITH SHRAPNEL RIPPED IT
APART DURING MONDAY MORNING RUSH
HOUR.
>> ( translated ): I HEARD IT, I
LIVE HERE IN THE COURTYARD, I
HAD JUST STARTED THE ENGINE OF
MY CAR.
AND I NOTICED THAT MY WHEEL WAS
FLAT.
I WENT OUT AND FELT THE BLAST.
THE GROUND WAS SHAKING, AND THE
WINDOWS OF THE CAR WERE SHAKING.
I THOUGHT AT FIRST THAT MAYBE IT
WAS A TIRE EXPLODED OR
>> Sreenivasan: A DAY EARLIER, A
WOMAN BLEW HERSELF UP AT
VOLGOGRAD'S MAIN RAILWAY
STATION, KILLING 17 PEOPLE.
CLOSED CIRCUIT TELEVISION
CAPTURED THE MOMENT OF
DETONATION OUTSIDE AND INSIDE
THE STATION.
TODAY, RUSSIA'S MAIN
INVESTIGATIVE AGENCY SAID THE
TWO BOMBS WERE SIMILAR, AND
LIKELY THE WORK OF THE SAME
GROUP.
>> ( translated ): ACCORDING TO
EXPLOSIVE DEVICE ON THE TROLLEY
BUS WAS AT LEAST THE EQUIVALENT
LIKE THE EXPLOSIVE DEVICE AT THE
TRAIN STATION, IT WAS STUFFED
WITH SHRAPNEL AND BECAUSE THE
SHRAPNEL WAS IDENTICAL IN BOTH
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES, THIS CONFIRMS
TO THE INVESTIGATORS THAT THE
TWO TERRORIST ACTS WERE
CONNECTED.
>> Sreenivasan: A STATE OF
EMERGENCY HAS NOW BEEN IMPOSED
IN VOLGOGRAD AND AUTHORITIES
HAVE STEPPED UP SECURITY AT
TRAIN STATIONS ACROSS RUSSIA.
>> ( translated ): I WANT TO
STRESS THAT BECAUSE OF THESE
EVENTS ACCORDING TO THE DECISION
ALL DEPARTMENTS WERE PUT UNDER A
REGIME OF HIGH ALERT ACROSS THE
WHOLE COUNTRY.
>> Sreenivasan: VOLGOGRAD WAS
ALSO HIT LAST OCTOBER-- BY A BUS
BOMBING CAPTURED ON VIDEO THAT
KILLED SIX.
THE SOUTHERN CITY IS THE FORMER
STALINGRAD, AND A KEY
TRANSPORTATION HUB FOR RUSSIA'S
RESTIVE NORTH CAUCASUS.
THE REGION INCLUDES DAGESTAN AND
CHECHNYA, WHERE MUSLIM
SEPARATISTS HAVE LONG SOUGHT
INDEPENDENCE.
THE CITY IS ALSO ABOUT 400 MILES
NORTHEAST OF SOCHI, WHE THERE
WINTER OLYMPICS WILL BE HELD IN
LESS THAN SIX WEEKS.
LAST JULY, CHECHEN REBEL LEADER
DOKU UMAROV THREATENED TO STRIKE
CIVILIAN TARGETS ACROSS RUSSIA,
INCLUDING AT SOCHI.
THE GOVERNMENT HAS EMPLOYED
EXTRAORDINARY MEASURES,
INCLUDING THE USE OF ELITE
FORCES, TO PROTECT THE WINTER
GAMES.
BUT AFTER TWO BOMBINGS IN TWO
DAYS, SOME IN VOLGOGRAD HAVE
THEIR DOUBTS.
>> ( translated ): I THINK THAT
OF THE PEOPLE STANDING HERE, NO
ONE WOULD TELL YOU THAT THEY
FEEL SAFE.
A LOT HAS BEEN PROMISED, BUT
LITTLE HAS BEEN DONE.
IT'S CLEAR, EVERYONE CAN SEE IT.
EVEN SO, THE HEAD OF THE RUSSIAN
OLYMPIC COMMITTEE VOICED
CONFIDENCE TODAY.
HE SAID, "EVERYTHING NECESSARY
HAS ALREADY BEEN DONE."
JOINING ME NOW TO DISCUSS WHO
MIGHT BE BEHIND THE ATTACKS, AND
THE SECURITY SITUATION
SURROUNDING THE UPCOMING OLYMPIC
GAMES ARE ANDREW WEISS, A
DIRECTOR FOR RUSSIAN, UKRAINIAN
AND EURASIAN AFFAIRS ON THE
NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL STAFF
DURING THE CLINTON AND GEORGE
H.W. BUSH ADMINISTRATIONS.
HE'S NOW A VICE PRESIDENT AT THE
CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT FOR
INTERNATIONAL PEACE.
AND BRIAN JENKINS HAS BEEN A
SECURITY CONSULTANT FOR MAJOR
SPORTING EVENTS INCLUDING THE
OLYMPICS AND THE WORLD CUP.
HE'S A TERRORISM EXPERT AND
SENIOR ADVISER AT THE RAND
CORPORATION.
I WANT TO START WITH YOU.
WHAT ORGANIZATION COULD BE
BEHIND THESE ATTACKS?
YOU WERE ALSO TELLING ME
THAT PERHAPS YESTERDAY'S
BOMBER WASN'T A WOMAN,HERE T
IS MORE INFORMATION COMING
OUT.
>> EVERYTHING WE KNOW RIGHT
NOW IS VERY FRAGMENTARY.
THE ACCOUNTS SUB THAT THE
BOMBER FROM SUNDAY'S ATTACK
ON THE TRAIN STATION IS A
RUSSIAN, ETHNIC RUSSIAN
CONVERT TO ISLAM WHO COMES
FROM THE RUSSIAN HEARTLAND
WHO MOVED TO THE DAGESTAN
REGION TO JOIN THE FIGHTERS
THERE.
AT THIS POINT THERE IS NO
INFORMATION ABOUT WHO IS
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE TROLLEY
BUS ATTACK EARLIER TODAY.
>> SO BRIAN JENKINS I WANT
TO ASK, WHEN WE THINK ABOUT
THESE LARGE SORT OF EVENTS
LIKE THE OLYMPICS AND SOME
EVENT LIKE THIS PROCEEDING
THAT, HOW DOES RUSSIA
PREPARE FOR IT?
>> WELL, SECURITY HAS BECOME
AN EXTREMELY IMPORTANT PART
OF OLYMPIC PLANNING, EVER
SINCE THE MUNICH ATTACK IN
1972.
AND SECURITY HAS COME TO
REALLY BE A DOMINANT ISSUE.
WE SAW ENORMOUS SECURITY FOR
THE BEIJING OLYMPICS AND IN
2008 AND FOR THE LONDON
OLYMPICS IN 2012.
BY NOW ALL OF THE SECURITY
MEASURES WOULD HAVE BEEN IN
PLACE IN SOCHI.
THOSE WOULD INCLUDE MEASURES
TO PROTECT THE ACTUAL VENUES,
THE SITES-OF-THE EVENTS
THEMSELVES, MEASURES IN
PLACE TO PROTECT THE
PARTICIPANTS IN THOSE EVENTS,
BOTH THE ATHLETES AND THE
OFFICIALS, AS WELL AS
MEASURES TO PROTECT THE
SPECTATORS WHO WILL BE
COMING TO VIEW THE EVENTS.
>> ANDREW, IF ALL OF THIS
EMPHASIS HAS BEEN ON SOCHI,
DOES THAT LEAVE THE REST OF
RUSSIAN-- RUSSIA UNPROTECTED
AND POSSIBLY TARGETS FOR I
GUESS INSURGENTS.
>> I THINK THERE IS NO DOUBT
THAT THE RUSSIAN CAN DO GOOD
SITE SECURITY K PROTECT
IMPORTANT TARGETS, THERE IS
NO DOUBT THERE A STRONG
SECURITY PRESENCE BUT YOU GO
TO ANY MAJOR RUSSIAN TRAIN
STATION, THERE WERE MACHINES
SET UP TO SCAN YOUR LUGGAGE,
PEOPLE JUST BREEZE PAST, I
HAVE NEVER HAD TO PUT MY
BAGS IN RECENT MEMORY ON
THOSE KINDS OF SCANNING
DEVICES, SO I THINK THE
COUNTRY ABOUNDS IN SOFT
TARGETS.
I THINK THE REBEL GROUPS
THAT ARE INTERESTED IN
EMBARRASSING THE REGIME
AHEAD OF THE OLYMPIC GAMES
ARE LIKELY TO BE LOOKING FOR
PLACES WHERE THE SECURITY
PRESENCE IS EITHER POOR OR
MINIMAL.
>> SO BRIAN JENKINS I HAVE
TO ASK, RUSSIA HAS BEEN
DEALING WITH THIS SORT OF
LOW LEVEL INSURGENCY FOR
YEARS NOW, WHY HAVEN'T THEY
BEEN ABLE TO STAMP IT OUT?
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, THE
CONFLICTS IN THE CAUCUSES GO
ABACK CENTURIES H SHALL THIS
IS A LONG NARRATIVE OF AN
AREA THAT HAS BEEN CONQUERED
BY BUT NEVER ENTIRELY
PACIFIED BY RUSSIA.
WHAT WE SAW RECENTLY ARE TWO
NASTY WARS.
THAT HAS, THAT HAS ACTIVATED
AN INCREASINGLY ISLAMIST
CHARACTER OF THE INSURGENCY
ITSELF STAMPING OUT A GROUP
LIKE THIS, IT TAKES OFTEN
TAKES DECADES.
WE DO SEE EXAMPLES AROUND
THE WORLD WHERE TERRORISTS
CAMPAIGNS HAVE GONE ON FOR
SCORES OF YEARS.
>> ANDREW WEISS, THE TIMING
OF THIS THERE IS CLEARLY A
POINT TO THIS.
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT SOME
OF THE OPPOSITION HAVE BEEN
SAYING OUT LOUD.
WE ARE PLANNING TO ATTACK
SOMETHING NEAR SOCHI IF NOT
SOCHI BUT THEY'RE MAKING A
STATEMENT JUST BY THE TIMING
OF THIS, RIGHT.
>> I THINK THE TIMING IS
DREADFUL.
THE RUSSIAN PUBLIC ARE ON
THEIR WAY TO THE BIGGEST
HOLIDAY OF THE YEAR WHICH IS
NEW YEARS, TO CREATE AN
ATMOSPHERE OF PANIC
THROUGHOUT THE RUSSIAN BODY
POLITIC IS A BIG DEAL.
IF YOU WENT TO MOSCOW WOULD
YOU HAVE SEEN STRATIONS
BEING EVACUATED, RANDOM
SEARCHES, IT CREATED A SENSE
TO PEOPLE THERE IS A REAL
THREAT, A LIVE THREAT AND
AUTHORITIES WILL BE
STRUGGLING TO HEAD IT OFF.
>> SO BRIAN JENKINS
CONSIDERING THAT THE EYES OF
THE WORLD ARE GOING TO BE ON
SOCHI, WHAT SORTS OF
MEASURES HAVE THE RUSSIANS
TAKEN?
THERE HAVE BEEN REPORTS THAT
THEY HAVE ESSENTIALLY ALMOST
SEALED OFF HE CTITY OR THEY
WILL SEAL OFF THE CITY
ALMOST A MONTH BEFORE THE
GAMES.
>> WELL, THAT IS CERTAINLY
THEIR GOAL.
THEY ARE GOING TO TRY TO
TURN THE ENTIRE CITY OF
SOCHI INTO THE SECURITY
EQUIVALENT OF BEN GURIN
AIRPORT IN TEL AVIV.
AND SO THERE WILL BE
MULTIPLE CHECKS, SOMETHING
THAT'S NEW AT THIS OLYMPICS
THAT WE HAVEN'T SEEN BEFORE
ARE THE CREDENTIALINGLY OF
THE SPECTATORS THEMSELVES H
THAT IS PEOPLE WHO BUY
TICKETS GO ON-LINE TO BUY
THESE TICKETS, RECEIVE A
CREDENTIAL AND THAT WILL
BECOME A WAY OF VERIFYING
THEIR IDENTITY AT THE ENTRY
TO EACH ONE OF THE-- EACH
ONE OF THE VENUES.
IN ADDITION THEY HAVE
INTRODUCED A SYSTEM THAT
WILL ENABLE THEM TO MONITOR
EVERY TELEPHONE CALL, EVERY
E-MAIL MESSAGE, EVERY FORM
OF ELECTRONIC CONVERSATION,
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS IN
SOCHI WILL BE NOT ONLY
MONITORS BUT THEY WILL HAVE
THE ABILITY TO INTERVENE AND
MODIFY THE MESSAGES
THEMSELVES.
BEYOND THAT, THOUGH, I MEAN
LOOK, YOU CAN DEFEND A PIECE
OF TERRITORY, PROTECT A
PIECE OF TERRITORY FOR A
PERIOD OF TIME.
BUT IF THE TERRORISTS HAVE
VIRTUALLY UNLIMITED TARGETS
ACROSS RUSSIA, WHAT YOU'RE
CONCERNED ABOUT IS EITHER
THAT THERE ARE PEOPLE
ALREADY IN SOCHI THAT HAVE
ALREADY INFILTRATED, AND
THERE ARE PREPOSITIONED
WEAPONS OR DEVICES IN SOCHI,
AND THE RUSSIANS HAVE
REPORTED THAT THEY HAVE
BUSTED UP SOME PLOTS WHERE
THERE HAVE BEEN
PREPOSITIONED MATERIAL, AT
LEAST CLOSE TO SOCHI, OR YOU
WORRY ABOUT AN ATTACK THAT
WILL BE CONCURRENT TO THE
OLYMPICS BUT IN ANOTHER PART
OF THE COUNTRY, BUT THAT
NONETHELESS WILL CAUSE
EMBARRASSMENT.
ONE OF THE GREATEST CONCERNS
IS THAT WE WILL SEE
SOMETHING LIKE A NAIROBI
SHOPPING MALL ATTACK OR A
MORE AMBITIOUSLY A MUMBAI
ATTACK OR LIKE SOME OF THE
MAJOR HOSTAGE SEIZURES THAT
WE'VE SEEN CARRIED OUT BY
THE CHECHENS BEFORE, WITH
DEMANDS TO SUSPEND THE
OLYMPICS.
>> SO ANDREW, HOW MUCH DO
THE POLITICS OF VLADIMIR
PUTTIN AND HIS TACTICS NOW
PLAY INTO THIS SITUATION?
>> I THINK THE RUSSIAN
TACTICAL PLAYBOOK HAS BEEN
CONSIST ENOVER THE PAST 15
YEARS.
IN THE CASE OF CHECHNYA THEY
PACIFIED THAT COUNTRY WITH
THE AID OF A LOCAL WAR LORD.
SO THEY BASICALLY SAID
ANYONE WHO IS RELIGIOUSLY ON
SERVE ANT WHO IS NOT FITTING
THE STANDARD PROFILE OF A
PEACEFUL CITIZEN, ARE YOU IN
OUR SIGHTS.
IN DAGESTAN THEY HAVE A
TOTAL MESS ON THEIR HANDS,
WHERE YOU HAVE A CONFLICT
WITH THREE OR FOUR LAYERS
THERE IS TREMENDOUS YOUTH
UNEMPLOYMENT,
RADICALLIZATION, THERE IS A
FIGHT IN TERMS OF TWO
DIFFERENT STRAINS OF ISLAM,
AND A VERY HEAVY-HANDED
SECURITY RESPONSE.
SO IN MANY WAYS THE RUSSIANS
HAVE CREATED THIS PROBLEM,
THEY HAVE FOUND NO SOLUTION
TO FIX IT.
>> ANDREW WEISes FROM THE
CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT OF PEACE,
BRIAN YEN KINS, THANK SO
SOS-JENK- INS THANKS SO MUCH
FOR YOUR TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: IRAN, THE UNITED
STATES AND OTHER WORLD POWERS
MET TODAY IN GENEVA TO HASH OUT
THE PRACTICAL DETAILS OF THE
DEAL SIGNED LAST MONTH, WHICH
SUSPENDS KEY ELEMENTS OF THE
ISLAMIC STATE'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM
IN EXCHANGE FOR LIMITED
SANCTIONS RELIEF.
MUCH HAS BEEN REPORTED ABOUT
OBJECTIONS TO THE DEAL AND
THREATS OF NEW SANCTIONS  BY
SOME IN THE U.S. AND SOME
AMERICAN ALLIES.
MUCH LESS IS KNOWN ABOUT HOW THE
INTERIM AGREEMENT AND PROSPECTS
FOR A FULL AGREEMENT ARE PLAYING
INSIDE IRAN.
TONIGHT, JEFFREY BROWN TAKES A
CLOSER LOOK AT THAT SIDE OF THE
STORY.
>> Brown: DAVID IGNATIUS,
FOREIGN AFFAIRS COLUMNIST FOR
THE "WASHINGTON POST," RECENTLY
RETURNED FROM A REPORTING TRIP
TO IRAN, WHERE HE LOOKED AT
PERCEPTIONS AND OPINIONS
SURROUNDING THE COUNTRY'S
NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE WEST.
HE JOINS ME NOW.
WELCOME BACK.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: YOU SAW A LIVELY
DEBATE WITHIN IRAN ABOUT
THIS DEAL.
EXPLAIN WHAT YOU SAW AND HOW
DID THE SIDES DIVIDE.
>> I WAS IN IRAN FOR FOUR
DAYS, NOT A LONG TIME SO I
DON'T WANT TO PRETEND THAT I
HAVE ANY KIND OF
COMPREHENSIVE VIEW.
BUT I DID MANAGE TO SEE
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MOST
PRAGMATIC, PRO NEGOTIATION
WING, THE FOREIGN MINISTER
ZARIF AND ONE OF THE HARDEST
LINE PEOPLE CLOSE TO THE
SUPREME LEADER, A MAN NAME
THE HUGHES ANN MADURI WHO
WAS THE EDITOR OF THE BIG
CONSERVATIVE NEWSPAPER.
THESE TWO SPOKE ABOUT THE
NEGOTIATIONS OVER THE
NUCLEAR ISSUE WITH THE
UNITED STATES AND OTHER
COUNTRIES IN SUCH DIFFERENT
TERMS.
AND WHAT WAS FASCINATING TO
ME WAS THE PRAGMATIST ZARIF
AND THE HARD-LINER MADURI
EACH SPOKE AS IF THEY WERE
TALKING FOR THE SUPREME
LEADER.
BOTH-- .
>> Brown: THEY DOTE --
>> BOTH CANNOT BE TRUE.
AND SO I HAD A SENSE, SOME
OF THIS I'M SURE IS A SHOW
FOR THE WEST, YOU KNOW, THE
TWO FACTIONS, IT IS A
CLASSIC NEGOTIATING
TECHNIQUEMENT BUT I THINK
THERE ARE REAL AND
FUNDAMENTAL DIFFERENCES.
>> Brown: YOU REPORTED THAT
SOME HARD-LINERS BELIEVE
THAT ZARIF EVEN MISREPRESENTED
THE ENRICHMENT PART OF THE
DEAL TO COMAINI.
>> I WAS TOLD THAT
SPECIFICALLY BY THE HARD
LINE EDITOR WHO SAID TO ME
WHEN I ASKED HIM WHY DID YOU
AGREE TO THE INTERIM DEAL IF
YOU THINK IT IS SUCH A BAD
IDEA.
SAID WELL THE FOREIGN
MINISTER ZARIF CALLED
PRESIDENT ROUHANI, THE NEW
PRESIDENT, IN THE MIDDLE OF
THE NIGHT FROM GENEVA AN
GAVE HIM AN ACCOUNT OF WHAT
WAS IN THE DEAL.
AND HE ON THAT BASIS WROTE A
LETTER TO THE SUPREME LEADER
CHOMEINI AND HE THEN SAID
THIS GENTLEMAN WAS NOT
CORRECT IN WHAT HE SAID.
SPECIFICALLY ON THE QUESTION
OF WHETHER THE DEAL PROVIDES
IRAN WITH A RIGHT TONE RICH
URANIUM AS IT HAS ALWAYS
CLAIMED IT MUST HAVE FOR ANY
DEAL.
AND THE HARD-LINER SAID THIS
DEAL DOES NOT PROVIDE US
WITH THE RIGHT TO ENRICH.
I THOUGHT AS I LISTENED TO
THIS THAT HE WAS PERHAPS
LAYING THE GROUND FOR THE
AYATOLLAH KHOMEINI
EVENTUALLY IF HE DECIDES
IRAN HAS NOT GOT WHAT HE
WANTS TO RENOUNCE THE
INTERIM DEAL AND SAY IT WAS
MISREPRESENTED TO ME BY THE
FOREIGN MINISTER.
>> Brown: PRESIDENT ROUHANI
OF COURSE GOT A LOT OF-- FOR
TAKING FAR MORE CONCILIATORY
VIEWS AND STATEMENTS THAN
HIS PREDECESSOR.
BUT THE QUESTION THAT YOU
ARE RAISING, FOR POLICYMAKERS
IS HOW STRONG STILL IS THIS
HARD LINE FACTION.
>> I THINK THERE'S NO WAY
FOR ANY OF US TO KNOW.
I ASKED THIS HARD LINE
PERSON CLOSE TO THE SUPREME
LEADER, DO YOU THINK
COMPROMISE WITH THE WEST IS
POSSIBLE ON THE NUCLEAR
DEAL.
AND HE ANSWERED DIRECTLY, NO,
I DON'T THINK IT IS.
I THINK THIS IS A MATTER OF
IDENTITY.
WE DON'T KNOW IF THE SUPREME
LEADER HIMSELF BELIEVES THAT,
CLEARLY ROUHANI THE
PRESIDENT DOESN'T.
HE AUTHORIZED THESE
NEGOTIATIONS, HE TOLD ME
BACK IN SEPTEMBER WHEN I
INTERVIEWED HIM IN NEW YORK
AT THE U.N. GENERAL ASSEMBLY
HE THOUGHT THIS INTERIM DEAL
COULD BE DONE IN THREE
MONTHS.
IT WAS DONE EVEN MORE
QUICKLY, I THOUGHT AT THE
TIME IT COULDN'T POSSIBLY BE
SO.
SO I THINK HE SEES THAT
ENDING SANCTIONS, GETTING
IRAN OUT FROM UNDER THIS
CLOUD IS IN THE COUNTRY'STHE
HARD-LINERS AND THE
REVOLUTIONARY GUARD WITH HIM
WE DON'T KNOW.
>> WHAT ABOUT POPULAR
OPINION AND HOW EASY OR
DIFFICULT IT IS TO GAUGE.
YOU WRITE ABOUT WHAT YOU
CALL A FAT AGENCY IN THE
COUNTRY.
>> AGAIN, I WAS THERE FOR A
SHORT TIME.
I DON'T WANT TOSTATE
WHAT I KNOW.
BUT CERTAINLY YOU SENSE A
KIND OF SHADOW HANGING OVER
IRAN.
THIS IS A COUNTRY THAT IS ON
THE VERGE OF BEING CHINA
LIKE DEVELOPING ECONOMY,
GROWING VERY RAPIDLY.
I TALKED TO FOUR DIFFERENT
ECONOMISTS WHO TALKED ABOUT
10% GROWTH RATES BEING
POSSIBLE IN THE FUTURE.
I MET IRANIAN SCIENTISTS WHO
HAD IDEAS FOR NEW COMPANIES
AND PRODUCTS.
>> IF THE SANCTIONS --
>> IF THE SANCTIONS ARE OFF.
>> THIS IS IMPOSSIBLE UNLESS
SANCTIONS ARE LIFTED.
SO THERE IS A COUNTRY THAT
SEES THIS INCREDIBLY
PROMISING FUTURE BUT WON'T
GET THERE UNLESS IT CAN MAKE
A NUCLEAR DEAL TO TAKE
SANCTIONS AWAYMENT SO WE
TALK ABOUT CRIPPLING
SANCTIONS.
I HAVE TO TELL YOU HONESTLY,
DRIVING AROUND TEHRAN,
TALKING TO PEOPLE, GOING TO
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS, YOU
DON'T SENSE THAT THIS IS AN
ECONOMY THAT IS CRIPPLED.
IT'S FUNCTIONING, AS PEOPLE
ARE DOING BUSINESS.
WHAT IS CRIPPLED IS ITS
FUTURE, IS THE OPPORTUNITY
THAT IRAN HAS TO BE THE KIND
OF COUNTRY IT WANTS, THAT IT
CAN BE IN TERMS OF HUMAN
CAPITAL.
>> YOU USED A COLOURFUL LINE
WHICH WAS TEAR RAN SEEMED A
CITY CAUGHT SOMEWHERE
BETWEEN PYONGYANG AND LOS
ANGELES.
>> WELL, IT'S A STRANGE
FEELING.
IN MANY WAYS YOU ARE
REMINDED OF LOS ANGELES IN
TEHRAN, IT LOOKS SIMILAR,
IT'S BUILT AGAINST A
MOUNTAIN T WAS WINTER SO IT
WAS CLEAR BUT USUALLY SMOG
HANGS OVER THE CITY.
TEHRANNIANS ARE FREEWHEELING
PEOPLE LIKE AMERICANS, IT IS
A VERY CULT C IRAN CAN
WHY SAY ABOUT ANOTHER IS
THIS PERSON IS UNCULTIVATED.
AT THE SAME TIME THAT IT'S
MODERN AND WESTERN-LIKE, IT
HAS AN AUTHORITARIAN
CLERICAL REGIME THAT DOES
MAKE YOU THINK OF NORTH
KOREA WHERE YOU FEEL THIS
LID ON THE COUNTRY, ON ITS
PEOPLE, ON ITS FUTURE.
AND IT'S THAT SENSE OF BEING
BETWEEN WHAT THEY ARE AND
WHAT THEY MIGHT BE IS THE
STRONGEST FEELING I TOOK
AWAY.
>> Brown: VERY BRIEFLY,SO IN
THE MEANTIME NEGOTIATIONS
RESTART EVEN TODAY ON
TECHNICAL ISSUES.
SO WHAT IS NEXT?
>> SO WHAT IS NEXT IS
WORKING OUT THE DETAILS OF
WHETHER IRAN WILL MAKE AN
OFFER FOR A COMPREHENSIVE
DEAL, AND THE VIEW OF THE
UNITED STATES AND ITS
NEGOTIATING PARRER IN THES
REVERSES THE NUCLEAR PROGRAM
SO THAT IRAN SHOWS THE WORLD
THAT IT WILL BE A PEACEFUL
NUCLEAR POWER ONLY IT WILL
HAVE CIVILIAN NUCLEAR ENERGY
ONLY.
AND THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE TO
OFFER QUITE A LOT.
THEY WILL HAVE TO SHUT DOWN
A LOT-OF-SUBTERFUGES, THEY
WILL PROBABLY HAVE TO CLOSE
THEIR HEAVY WATER REACTOR
FOR THAT DEAL TO BE
ACCEPTABLE.
>> DAVID IGNATIUS OF "THE
WASHINGTON POST", THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANKS.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT, TO A VERY
DIFFERENT DEBATE, THIS ONE OVER
CORN.
THE MIDWEST'S AMBER WAVES OF
GRAIN NOW FREQUENTLY GET THEIR
START FROM SEEDS GROWN ON THE
ISLANDS OF HAWAII.
BUT THERE ARE INCREASING
QUESTIONS AROUND HOW THEY ARE
PRODUCED.
THAT'S THE SUBJECT OF ONE OF THE
SIGNATURE PIECES FROM THE
"NEWSHOUR" WEEKEND PROGRAM.
WE ARE FEATURING THEM THIS
HOLIDAY SEASON.
THIS REPORT IS BY "NEWSHOUR"
CORRESPONDENT MEGAN THOMPSON.
>> THE HAWAIIAN ISLAND OF
KUAI IS KNOWN AS THE GARD
ENAISLE, LURING 100 OF
THOUSANDS OF TOURISTS TO ITS
LUSH NORTHERN SHORES.
BUT FEWER MAKE IT DOWN TO
THE DRYER SOUTHWEST SIDE
HOME TO NATIVE HAWAIIANS WHO
LIVED HERE FOR GENERATIONS
AN WHERE FARMING HAS ALWAYS
BEEN A WAY OF LIFE.
TODAY THESE FIELDS ARE HOME
TO LARGE BIOTECH COMPANIES
DEVELOPING HAWAIIAN BIGGEST
AGRICULTURE PRODUCT, SEEDS,
GENETICALLY MODIFIED SEEDS,
MISLY CORN, TO BE SHIPPED
BACK AND GROWN ON THE
MAINLAND.
THOSE FIELDS BEHIND ME
BELONG TO PIONEER ONE OF THE
BIG SEED COMPANIES HERE IN
KUAI THE.
THE REVEILING WINDS BELOW
OUT OF THE NORTHEAST AND THE
RESIDENTS SAY WHEN THOSE
WINDS BLOW THEY BRING DUST
AND PESTICIDES FROM THESE
FIELDS DOWN INTO THEIR
NEIGHBORHOODS AND HOMES.
AND SOME BELIEVE THAT IS
MAKING THEIR CHILDREN SICK.
>> IN 2007 I GAVE BIRTH TO
MY SON.
AND WITHIN A DAY WE REALIZED
HE WAS SEIZING AND WE FOUND
THAT HIS BRAIN HAD
HEMORRHAGED AND HE LOST THE
WHOLE ENTIRE RIGHT FRONTAL
LOBE.
>> SIX-YEAR-OLD STILL HAS
FREQUENT SEIZURES ARC
CORDING TO HIS MOTHER.
AFTER CONSULTING WITH I
PEDIATRIC NEUROLOGIST AND
BLOOD SPECIALIST, SHE NOW
WONDERS IF ALL HER SON'S
PROBLEMS WERE CAUSED BY THE
LOCATION OF THEIR HOME IN
THE VALLEY JUST BELOW THE
FIELDS.
>> THE ONLY THING I COULD
THINK OF IS I LIVED HERE THE
WHOLE TIME I'M PREGNANT AND
I'M GETTING THIS DRIFT OF
DUST CONSTANTLY WITH
PESTICIDES.
YOU DON'T KNOW FOR SURE WHAT
THE CAUSE WAS OF YOUR SON'S
ILLNESS.
>> NO.
AND THAT'S SCARY TO ME.
AND I CAN'CAUSE THEY'RE NOT
DISCLOSING ANYTHING TO US.
> A> BATTLE HAS ERUPTED HERE
OVER THE SEED FARMS.
MORE THAN 150 RESIDENTS HAVE
SUED PIONEER.
THOUGH PIONEER DECLINED TO
COMMENT ON THE LITIGATION,
THE FAMILIES ALLEGE THAT
DUST AND PESTICIDES
CONTAMINATED THEIR HOMES.
THEY'RE ALSO SEEKING DAMAGES
FOR LOST PROPERTY VALUE.
THOUSANDS OF OTHERS ON THE
ISLAND DEMONSTRATED.
> TH>IS PUBLIC HEARING IS
CALLED TO ORDER.
>> Reporter: AND PACKED
COUNTY COUNCIL HEARINGS IN
SUPPORT OF A BILL IMPOSING
NEW REELS ON THE SEED
GROWERS.
IT CREATES BUFFER ZONES
AROUND THE FIELDS AND FORCES
THE COMPANIES TO DISCLOSE
WHAT PESTICIDES THEY'RE
USING, WHEN THEY'RE SPRAYING,
AND HOW MUCH.
SEVERAL LOCAL DOCTORS HAVE
EXPRESSED SUPPORT FOR THE
LEGISLATION CITING SERIOUS
HEALTH CONCERNS.
>> THERE IS A STRONG
ANECDOTAL EVIDENCE THAT
THERE IS A STATISTICALLY
SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCE IN
THE INCIDENCE OF CANCER AND
BIRTH DEFECTS.
>> ONE PEDIATRICIAN WROTE IN
AN E-MAIL THAT HE OBSERVED
RARE HEART DEFECTS IN BABIES
TEN TIMES THE NATIONAL
AVERAGE BUT SAYS YEARS OF
RESEARCH WOULD BE NEEDED TO
ESTABLISH THE CAUSE.
>> IT'S REALLY QUITE SIMPLE.
TELL US WHAT YOU ARE
SPRAYING, WHAT YOU ARE
GROWING, THEN LET US DO A
STUDY TO DETERMINE WHETHER
PEOPLE REALLY ARE GETTING
SICK.
>> LOCAL POLITICIAN GARY
HOOSER INTRODUCED THE BILL.
HE GOT INVOLVED IN 2008
AFTER A NOXIOUS ODOR SENT
SEVERAL CHILDREN AND A
TEACHER AT A SCHOOL NEXT TO
ONE OF THE FIELDS TO THE
EMERGENCY ROOM.
COMPLAINING OF DIZZINESS AND
NAUSEA.
>> THIS IS SERIOUS, SERIOUS
STUFF THAT DESERVES OUR
ATTENTION, IT DESERVES TO BE
DEALT WITH NOW.
>> Reporter: THE SEED
COMPANY AN THEIR EMPLOYEES
CAN NOT ENFORCE TO FIGHT THE
BILL.
>> WE ARE GOOD PEOPLE AND WE
DO THE RIGHT THING.
>> Reporter: THE COMPANY
SAID THEY FOLLOW GOVERNMENT
GUIDELINES ON PESTICIDE
SPRAYING.
AND THAT REVEALING THEIR
FARMING PRACTICES COULD MAKE
THEM LESS COMPETITIVE.
WHAT'S MORE, SOME OF THE
LARGEST EMPLOYERS ON THE
WEST SIDE, THEY SAID THE
OTHER REQUIREMENTS COULD
THREATEN THE OPERATIONS AND
THE HUNDREDS OF JOBS THEY
PROVIDE.
>> MOST PEOPLE ON THE WEST
SIDE IS EMPLOYED BY THE SEED
COMPANY.
WE ALL LIVE AS A COMIT
>> THE FOUR BIOTECH
COMPANIES ONLY LEASE MORE
THAN 123,000-- 12,000 ACRES
CLOSE TO 20% OF THE ISLAND
USE WILLABLE FARM LAND.
THEIR FIELDS DUMP UP BY
TOWNS.
SEEDS ARE BIG BUSINESS IN
THE STATE OF HAWAII VALUED
AT MORE THAN $240 MILLION A
YEAR.
MORE THAN TRIPLE THE SECOND
LARGEST COMMODITY SUGAR.
MARK PHILIPSON WORKS FOR SI
SINGENTA AND PRESIDENT OF A
SEED TRADE GROUP.
WHICH REPRESENTS THE FOUR
COMPANIES.
>> THE REASON THAT WE'RE
HERE IS THE WEATHER.
THERE IS NO WINTER.
WE'RE HERE 365 DAYS A YEAR
SO WE CAN GET THREE CROPS A
YEAR WHEREAS IF WE DO THIS
RESEARCH OR PRODUCTION ON
THE MAINLAND WE WOULD GET
ONE CROP PER YEAR.
SO SOMETHING THAT WOULD TAKE
TEN TO 12 YEARS TO DEVELOP
WE CAN DO HERE IN 3 TO 4
YEARS.
>> PHILIPSON SAYS SEED
COMPANIES HAVE DEVELOPED
BETTER AND STRONGER PLANTS.
GENETICALLY MODIFIED TO
WITHSTAND DROUGHT AND PESTS.
TODAY ALMOST 90% OF THE CORN
GROWN IN THE UNITED STATES
IS GENETICALLY MODIFIED.
AND ACCORDING TO ONE
INDUSTRY STUDY SINCE 1996,
THE TECHNOLOGY HAS BROUGHT
AN ECONOMIC BENEFIT OF MORE
THAN $24 BILLION TO
AMERICA'S FARMERS.
>> THIS IS A ROW OF CORN AND
YOU CAN SEE THERE IS A LOT
OF DAMAGE HERE TO THE EAR.
THAT IS ALL FROM AN EAR
WORM.
THIS IS THE SAME LINE, SAME
EXACT LINE OF CORN BUT IT
HAS GOT OUR TERRA TRAITS IN
IT AND YOU CAN SEE THERE IS
NO EAR DAMAGE AT ALL TO THIS
EAR, IT'S BEAUTIFUL.
>> Reporter: EVEN THOUGH THE
SEED COMPANIES ARE ONLY
GROWING CROPS FOR RESEARCH
PURPOSES, THEY STILL USE
CONVENTIONAL FARMING METHODS,
THAT INCLUDES THE-- THAT
INCLUDES THE APPLICATION OF
RESTRICTED USE PESTICIDES,
CHEMICALS REGULATED BY THE
EPA THAT CAN ONLY BE HANDLED
BY PEOPLE WITH A SPECIAL
LICENCE.
>> WE FOLLOW ALL THE FEDERAL
AND STATE GUIDELINES ON
PESTICIDE USE AND THOSE
GUIDELINES ARE VERY STRICT
AND THEY'RE MONITORED.
WE'RE VERY CAREFUL IN HOW WE
APPLY THE PESTICIDES.
WE MEASURE WIND DIRECTION,
WIND SPEED.
IT IS NOT ANY ADVANTAGE FOR
US TO HAVE THINGS DRIFT OUT
ANYWHERE.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE OF A
NEW STATE REGISTRY ON
PESTICIDE SALES AND THE
LAWSUIT AGAINST PIONEER,
SOME INFORMATION ON WHAT'S
BEING SPRAYED HAS STARTED TO
COME OUT.
BUT THE SEED COMPANIES WHICH
INVEST BILLIONS OF DOLLARS
IN RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
HAD BEEN LARGELY RELUCTANT
TO SHARE MORE SPECIFICS.
>> -- ARE ANY OF YOU WILLING
TO DISCLOSE THAT AMOUNT.
SO I WILL TAKE THE SILENCE
AS A NO.
>> THE PEOPLE IN THE
COMMUNITY HERE HAVE BEEN
ASKING FOR A FEW YEARS NOW
TO KNOW WHAT PESTICIDES ARE
BEING SPRAYED BY THE SEED
COMPANIES HERE, HOW MUCH
WHY HAS THAT INFORMATION NOT
BEEN DISCLOSED?
>> THE REASON IS NOT SOME OF
THERE'S TRADE SECRETS BUT
IT'S MORE OF COMPETITIVENESS,
FASTEST-- OF THE PESTICIDE
USE WOULD PROBABLY TELL ME
THE INGREDIENTS THAT YOU ARE
USING THAT I MIGHT NOT BE
USING.
WE EACH REPRESENT A UNIQUE
COMPANY THAT HAS A PRODUCT
AND A COMPETITIVE
MARKETPLACE.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF PEOPLE
IN THIS COMMUNITY WHO SAY
THAT THEY'RE GETTING SICK.
AND THEY THINK IT MIGHT BE
THE PESTICIDES.
WHAT DOW SAY TO THAT?
>> PROBABLY THE FIRST PEOPLE
IN THE COMMUNITY THAT WOULD
GET SICK WOULD BE OUR
WORKERS.
AND THERE'S NO INDICATION OF
THAT.
>> PHILIPSON ALSO POINTS TO
A RECENT STUDY BY THE HAWAII
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH SHOWING
CANCER RATES ARE NO HIGHER
THERE THAN IN OTHER PARTS OF
THE STATE.
AND OTHER TESTS SHOWING AIR
AND WATER SAMPLES TO BE
SAFE.
BUT CRITICS ACCUSE THE
COMPANIES OF NOT FOLLOWING
SPRAYING GUIDELINES CLOSELY
ENOUGH.
ATTORNEYS IN THE PIONEER
LAWSUIT SAY THIS VIDEO THEY
SHOT SHOWS PESTICIDES
BLOWING OFF A FIELD NEAR
TOWN.
AN EVEN THOUGH MANY OF THE
PESTICIDES ARE THE SAME ONES
USED BY FARMERS IN THE
MIDWEST, FOR EXAMPLE,
CRITICS POINT OUT THEY'RE
BEING APPLIED DURING MORE
MONTHS OF THE YEAR HERE.
>> HOW YOU CAN TELL ME I
DON'T HAVE A RIGHT TO KNOW
WHAT THEY'RE SPRAYING.
>> AND THAT'S WHY SOME
RESIDENTS INCLUDING LOCAL
DOCTORS LIKE RICK GOODING
BELIEVES MORE RESEARCH IS
NEEDED.
>> THE THING ABOUT THE
PHYSICIANS IS WE WANT TO BE
VERY CAREFUL AND I THINK
SOME OF THEM ARE AFRAID TO
SAY ANYTHING BECAUSE THEY'RE
AFRAID TO BE PERCEIVED AS
SAYING THEY'RE SPRAYING AND
THEREFORE THIS IS HAPPENING.
I'M NOT SAYING THAT.
I DON'T KNOW ANY PHYSICIANS
THAT ARE SAYING THAT.
WHAT WE'RE SAYING IS THEY'RE
SPRAYING AND WE HAVE SOME
PROBLEMS.
CAN WE FIND OUT MORE ABOUT
WHAT THEY'RE SPRAYING AND
CAN WE LOOK AT THE
POSSIBILITY AS TO WHETHER
IT'S GOT AN EFFECT ON SOME
OF THE SIGNIFICANT HEALTH
PROBLEMS WE HAVE IN THE
COMMUNITY.
>> EVEN THOUGH THAT BILL
REQUIRING THE SEED COMPANIES
TO CREATE BUFFER ZONES AND
DISCLOSE THEIR SPRAYING WAS
PASSED IN MID-OCTOBER, AT
LEAST ONE SEED COMPANY SAID
IT'S EXPLORING LEGAL OPTIONS
TO BLOCK THE LEGISLATION.
SO IT COULD BE A LONG TIME
BEFORE THESE RESIDENTS GET
ALL THE INFORMATION THAT
THEY'RE LOOKING FOR.
>> Brown: SINCE OUR REPORT
>> Sreenivasan: SINCE OUR REPORT
FIRST AIRED, THE KAUAI MAYOR
VETOED THE PESTICIDE BILL.
BUT THE COUNTY COUNCIL CAME BACK
WITH A VOTE TO OVERRIDE THAT
VETO, AND THE BILL IS SET TO
BECOME LAW.
SEVERAL OTHER HAWAII COUNTIES
HAVE FOLLOWED KAUAI'S LEAD AND
HAVE ALSO PASSED OR PRESENTED
SIMILAR LEGISLATION FOR
GENETICALLY MODIFIED FARMING AND
PESTICIDE USE.
NOW TO A WRAP UP OF PROGRESS AND
POTENTIAL PITFALLS
IN THE WORLD OF SCIENCE.
BEFORE SHE LEFT FOR VACATION,
JUDY WOODRUFF RECORDED OUR
CONVERSATION.
IT WAS A YEAR WHEN CONCERNS
OVER ENERGY AND RISING
LEVELS OF GREENHOUSE-GAS
EMISSIONS MOVED FRONT AND
CENTER AGAIN, DOMESTIC OIL
RO LEVELS.
BUT DUE IN NO SMALL PART TO
DRILLING TECHNIQUES HAVE
THAT RAISED WORRIES AND
ANGER OVER POSSIBLE
CONSEQUENCES.
IT CAME AS THE U.N. REPORTED
ANOTHER MILESTONE,
SCIENTISTS SAID THAT GLOBAL
CARBON DIOXIDE LEVELS
REACHED THEIR HIGHEST LEVELS
IN RECORDED HISTORY.
THIS WAS ALSO THE YEAR THAT
RESEARCHERS SAID THEY ARE
FINDING WAYS TO GET THE
BODY'S IMMUNE SYSTEM TO
ATTACK CANCERS IN SMALL
NUMBERS OF PATIENTS.
THE NEWSHOUR SCIENCE
CORRESPONDENT MILES O'BRIEN
IS HERE AND HE FILLS OUT THE
PICTURE, MILES.
IT'S GOOD TO HAVE YOU WITH
US.
>> GOOD TO BE HERE.
>> Warner: SO THE FIRST
DEVELOPMENT YOU HIGHLIGHT,
THE ENERGY REVOLUTION IS
KIND OF REMARKABLE BECAUSE
IT SEEMS LIKE JUST YESTERDAY
POLICYMAKERS WORRIED ABOUT
NEEDING MORE OIL, NEEDING
THE IMPORT OIL BUT THE
PICTURE HAS CHANGED.
>> IT'S BREATHTAKING HOW
QUICKLY THINGS CAN CHANGE.
WHAT WE ARE TALKING ABOUT IS
ENERGY INDEPENDENCE IN THE
NEXT FEW YEARS.
BUT 2015 THE EXPERTS SAY THE
U.S. WILL BE THE LARGEST
ENERGY PRODUCER IN THE
WORLD.
I MEAN WHEN YOU THINK OF
WHAT WE WANT THROUGH IN THE
70s IN THIS COUNTRY, THAT'S
A TAGGERING STATEMENT AND
THIS ALL GOES TO THE ROOT OF
HYDRAULIC TRACK TURING WHICH
HAS BEEN AROUND-- FRACTURING,
WHICH HAS MATURED TO THE
POINT WHERE IT IS DERIVING
TREMENDOUS OUTPUT FOR U.S.
SOURCES.
>> AND IT HAS AN AFFECT ON
THE LIVES OF ODE PEOPLE.
>> IT DOES.
YOU KNOW, IT GOES
ACROSS-THE-BOARD WHEN YOU
THINK OF THE ECONOMIC
IMPLICATIONS, THERE'S TALK
OF A MANUFACTURING
RENAISSANCE IN THIS RI:.
IT CHANGES GEO POLITICS IN A
SIGNIFICANT WAY, DOES THE
PENTAGON NEED TO DEFEND THE
STRAIT OF HORMUZ LIKE IT
ONCE DID.
IT CUTS ACROSS A LOT OF
THINGS, THERE IS A LOT OF
POTENTIAL UPSIDE BUT AS YOU
WELL KNOW THERE IS A BIG
DOWNSIDE.
>> AND WE'RE HEARING MORE
ABOUT THAT.
THE ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERN.
>> WELL, THERE IS A FLIP
SIDE TO ALL THIS.
YOU KNOW, ALL THIS, THE
UPSIDE TALKING ABOUT THE
ECONOMY IS ONE THING.
BUT WHEN YOU CONSIDER THE
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT, THERE
IS A LOT TO THINK ABOUT.
AN THIS YEAR SCIENTISTS
RELEASED A STUDY WHICH
DEFINITIVELY LINKED A SERIES
OF EARTHQUAKES IN YOUNGSTOWN,
OHIO, TO HYDRAULIC
FRACTURING, THAT IS THE
FIRST TIME THOSE DOTS HAVE
BEEN CONNECTED IN THIS WAY.
INTUITIVELY YOU WOULD THINK
WELL WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT
THE PROCESS, DRILLING DOWN
AND HORIZONTALLY, INJECTING
WATER AND SAND AND OTHER
CHEMICALS IN ORDER TO PULL
THE NATURAL GAS AND THE OIL
OUT, YOU WOULD STAND TO
REASON THAT THIS MIGHT CAUSE
EARTHQUAKES.
BUT THIS IS A CONCERN WHEN
YOU THINK ABOUT THAT
POTENTIAL AND ALSO WATER
QUALITY ISSUES AND GENERAL
CONCERN ABOUT THE
ENVIRONMENT THAT GOES ALONG
WITH ALL THIS.
AND THEN COUPLE THAT WITH
THE FACT THAT A LOT OF
PEOPLE WHO ARE VERY
CONCERNED ABOUT CLIMATE
CHANGE SEE THIS AS KICKING
DOWN THAT-- KICKING THE CAN
DOWN THE ROAD ON MOVING
TOWARD RENEWABLES.
IF FOSSIL FUELS ARE THAT
READILY AVAILABLE, THAT
INEXPENSIVE AND THAT
PLENTIFUL IN THIS COUNTRY,
THE MOVE TOWARDS SOLAR
ENERGY, THE MOVE TOWARD
ALTERNATIVES THAT WOULD GET
NEWS A SITUATION WHERE WE
WERE HASTENING THE CLIMB AT
CHANGE PROBLEM GETS MOVED
DOWN THE ROAD.
AND THAT IS A CONCERN.
>> AND SPEAKING OF CLIMATE
CHANGES THAT'S ANOTHER AREA
THAT YOU HIGHLIGHT.
THE WORLD SAW SOME REALLY
STUNNING DEVELOPMENTS WHEN
IT CAME TO CLIMATE CHANGE.
>> YES.
>> I MEAN THE LARGEST
RECORDED STORM EVER, THAT
STRUCK THE PHIL FIENNS, IT'S
VERY DIFFICULT TO CONNECT
THE DOTS AND SAY CLIMATE
CHANGE CAUSED A PARTICULAR
STORM BUT WE DO KNOW
HURRICANES, CYCLONES ARE FED
BY WARM OCEAN WATER.
THE OCEANS ARE WARMING.
WE KNOW THAT, THAT IS A
SCIENTIFIC FACT.
AND SO THERE ARE A LOT OF
STUDIES OUT THERE, WHICH
INDICATE A LOT OF GOOD DATA
THAT WOULD SUGGEST THAT
THERE WILL BE MORE STORMS
AND STRONGER STORMS IN THE
FUTURE.
THIS IS STILL EMERGING
SCIENCE BUT I THINK YOU KNOW
INTUITIVELY WHEN YOU THINK
ABOUT WHAT FUEL IT'S A STORM
LIKE THIS, CLIMATE CHANGE
MIGHT HAVE SOMETHING TO DO
WITH IT.
AND THEN ON TOP OF THAT WE
REACH THIS KIND OF
UNFORTUNATE MILESTONE.
400 PARTS PER MILLION OF CAR
DONE DIOXIDE.
WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
PUT IT THIS WAY, SCIENTISTS
WILL TELL YOU 350 IS A GOOD
NUMBER.
WE'RE OVER THAT AND THAT
NUMBER IS SOMETHING THIS
PLANET HAS NOT SEEN IN
MILLIONS OF YEARS, NOT IN
RECORDED HISTORY.
AND THIS OCCURRED IN THE
COURSE OF THE INDUSTRIAL
REVOLUTION.
WE ARE SPEEDING UP THE
CLIMATE IN WAYS, WE'RE PART
OF AN SPERM WE DON'T KNOW
WHERE WE'RE HEADED WITH IT.
>> AND ALL OF IT IN THE LAST
YEAR, SO MILES TURN TO
MEDICAL SCIENCE AND WE
LEWDED TO THAT JUST A MOMENT
AGO.
>> EXCITING NEWS ON THE
CANCER FRONT.
A LOT OF RESEARCH RIGHT NOW
WHICH INDICATES THAT THE
SCIENTISTS ARE COMING TO THE
POINT WHERE THEY'RE ABLE TO
USE OUR OWN IMMUNE SYSTEMS
TO ATTACK CANCER CELLS.
NOW THE PROBLEM WITH CANCER
IS BASICALLY IT'S OUR OWN
CELLS REPLICATING IN AN
UNCONTROLLABLE WAY SO THE
IMMUNE SYSTEM DOESN'T
RECOGNIZE IT AS A THREAT.
AND SO WITH SOME VACCINES
AND USE OF ANTI-BODIES AND
WAYS OF EXTRACTING AND
ADDING ADDITIONAL T-CELLS AS
THEY'RE CALLED WHICH ARE
KIND OF WARRIOR CELLS IN
YOUR BODY, THEY ARE COMING
UP WITH WAYS IN CLINICAL
TRIALS, IT'S VERY EARLY, TO
SHOW SOME PROGRESS AND
REMISSIONS IN VARIOUS FORMS
OF CANCER, IT'S EXTREMELY
EXCITING BECAUSE THINK OF
THE ALTERNATIVES, RADIATION
AND CHEAM THERMY WHICH KILL
CELLS ALLOVER YOUR BODY.
>> TELL US WHAT THOSE TRIALS
HAVE FOUND.
>> IT VERY EARLY SO WE HAVE
TO BE CAREFUL BECAUSE IT CAN
GIVE FALSE HOPE TO PEOPLE
WHO ARE FACING TERM NAL
ILLNESSES.
BUT IN CASE OF MELANOMA,
LIEU KEEP YA, PANCREATIC
CANCER, SOME OF THESE SMALL
TRIALS, RESEARCHERS HAVE
BEEN ABLE TO ESSENTIALLY
AUGMENT OUR OWN IMMUNE
SYSTEM TO HELP IT IDENTIFY
CANCER AT A PROBLEM.
THE PROBLEM IS WE-- CANCER
IS OUR OWN CELLS SO OUR
IMMUNE SYSTEM DOESN'T
IDENTIFY IT AS A THREAT AND
DOESN'T GO AFTER IT WITH THE
T-CELLS AND ALL THE THINGS
WHICH GO AFTER AND KEEP OUR
BODIES HEALTHY.
AND SO IF YOU CAN TWEAK
THOSE THINGS EITHER
GENETICALLY WITH VACCINES OR
BY ADDING ADDITIONAL AMOUNT
ITS OF THEM TO GO AFTER AND
IDENTIFY CANCER AS A THREAT,
IT RAISES THE POSSIBILITY OF
VERY TARGETED THERAPIES
WHICH GO AFTER ONLY THE
CANCER CELLS AND DON'T CAUSE
ALL THIS COLLATERAL DAMAGE
TO OUR BODIES.
THE INITIAL INDICATIONS FROM
THESE EARLY TRIALS ARE THAT
THIS HAS A LOT OF PROMISE.
MANY YEARS BEFORE THIS IS
GOING TO BE WIDELY USED BUT
CANCER RESEARCHERS ARE
EXTREMELY EXCITED ABOUT
THIS.
>> AND YET THIS IS HAPPENING
MIMS AT A TIME WHEN FEDERAL
DOLLARS, THE MONIES THAT'S
REQUIRED TO DO THIS RESEARCH
IS GETTING SCARCER.
>> I WAS TEMPTED TO PUT THAT
AT THE TOP OF MY LIST.
EVERY RESEARCHER I TALK TO
EVERY SCIENTIST SPEAKS ABOUT
WHAT A DARK TIME IT IS FOR
FEDERAL FUNDING FOR BASIC
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH.
A LOT OF PEOPLE IN
WASHINGTON WOULD SAY WELL
WHY DON'T WE HAVE THE
PRIVATE SECTOR FUND THIS.
THE PRIVATE SECTOR DOESN'T
FUND THINGS IF IT DOESN'T
SEE A GOOD SOLID BUSINESS
PLAN.
THERE IS A ROLE FOR
FOUNDATION MONEY AND FEDERAL
FUNDING TO FUND BASIC
RESEARCH.
THIS KIND OF THING.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT THIS
WORK ON CANCER, THE BIG
PHARMA ENTITIES DID TO THE
GET INVOLVED IN THIS UNTIL
VERY RECENTLY.
ALL THIS WORK HAPPENED IN
LARGE PART THANKS TO FEDERAL
FUNDING WHICH WAS THERE WHEN
THERE WAS NO BUSINESS PLAN,
THERE WAS NO OBVIOUS
CONCLUSION.
>> AND THIS WAS A CASE WHERE
IN WASHINGTON EARLIER THIS
YEAR WHEN WE HAD THE
SO-CALLED SEQUESTER, THE
AUTOMATIC ACROSS-THE-BOARD
SPENDING CUTS, HAD A DIRECT
EFFECT ON THE MONEY THAT THE
ORGANIZATIONS LIKE THE
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF
HEALTH, OTHER SCIENCE ORIENTED
ORGANIZATIONS AND WHAT THEIR
BUDGETS WERE.
>> THEY WANT INTO SEQUESTER
WITH FLAT LINES OR REDUCED
BUDGETS.
THE SEQUESTER RUINED A LOT
OF GOOD SCIENCE AND
FUNDAMENTAL SCIENCE THAT
HAPPENS AT NIH WHICH
ULTIMATELY LEADS TO CURES
FOR CANCER, WE HOPE, WAS SET
BACK TREMENDOUSLY.
AND THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
AS WASHINGTON STRUGGLES WITH
THE BUDGET, IT'S EASY TO SAY
THESE THINGS ARE, YOU KNOW,
EXTRA AND NOT NECESSARY.
BUT IN THE END WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT PEOPLE'S LIVES.
>> Woodruff: AND THERE HAVE
BEEN SOME CHANGES JUST
RECENTLY WITH THE KBUJ
AGREEMENT BUT NOT, BUT A LOT
OF THAT MONEY IS GONE.
>> IT'S GONE.
>> Woodruff: BUT AND THERE'S
A CONNECTION MILES WITH THE
LAST AREA THAT YOU WANT TO
POINT OUT, SPACE.
>> I WOULD BE REMISS IF WE
DIDN'T TALK A LITTLE ABOUT
SPACE.
NASA HAS BEEN AFFECTED
DRAMATICALLY BY THIS.
IN THIS PAST YEAR ONE OF THE
TWO VOYAGER SPACECRAFT LEFT
THE SOLAR SYSTEM INTO
INTERSTELLAR SPACE IT WENT.
LAUNCHED IN 1977, WE COULD
GO ON AND ON ABOUT THE
SCIENTIFIC DATA THAT IT
BROUGHT IN DURING THAT TIME.
IT WAS A STIG MILESTONE BUT
IN THE SAME YEAR THAT
HAPPENED, THE ADMINISTRATION
OF NASA SAID WE'RE NOT GOING
TO BE ABLE TO AFFORD ANY OF
THESE SO-CALLED FLAGSHIP
MISSIONS IN THE FUTURE.
AGAIN, BUDGETARY TYPE OF
PROBLEMS.
AN MEANWHILE, THE CHINESE
HAVE A ROVER ON THE MOON.
SO WHAT IS IT THAT THE
CHINESE HAVE LEARNED ABOUT
US THAT WE HAVE FORGOTTEN?
I WONDER ABOUT THAT.
>> Woodruff: MILES O'BRIEN
OUR SCIENCE CORRESPONDENT,
WE THANK YOU.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY TONIGHT,
A LOOK BACK AT LAST YEAR'S
PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN, AND WHAT
THE RESULT MEANS FOR OUR
POLITICS HEADING INTO 2014 AND
BEYOND.
GWEN IFILL TAPED THAT
CONVERSATION BEFORE LEAVING FOR
THE NEW YEAR HOLIDAY.
>> Ifill: ONE YEAR AFTER
PRESIDENT OBAMA WON HIS
SECRETARY TERM IN OFFICE WE
ARE STILL LEARNING ABOUT
WHAT THE 2012 ELECTION
TAUGHT US ABOUT WHAT
AMERICANS EXPECT OF THEIR
LEADERS AND THE PATH THOSE
LEADERS TAKE TO THE
PRESIDENCY.
MUCH THAT IS CAPTURED IN
MOMENTS LIKE THOSE
CHRONICLES IN DOUBLE DOWN,
GAME CHANGE 2012 WIN BY MARK
HALPERIN AND EDITOR AT LARGE
AND SENIOR POLITICAL ANALYST
FOR "TIME" MAGAZINE AND JOHN
HILEMAN THANK YOU BOTH FO
FOR-- HEILEMANN, THANK YOU
FOR MAKING TIME TO US.
>> SO WHAT DID WE LEARN
ABOUT OURSELVES FROM AN
ELECTION LIKE 2012, MARK?
>> WELL, THIS WAS A BIG
CHOICE ELECTION FOR THE
COUNTRY AS IT ALWAYS IS.
AND PRESIDENT OBAMA AS WE
WERE WRITING THE BOOK FELT
THIS WAS IN SOME WAYS A
BIGGER ELECTION FOR HIM.
HE FELT TO SOME EXTENT HE
WON THE FIRST TIME BASED ON
PEOPLE WANT HOPE AND CHANGE,
A CHANGE IN DIRECTION FROM
THE BUSH YEARS, SO HE WANTED
TO AS THE TITLE OF OUR BOOK
SAYS HAVE THE COUNTRY DOUBLE
DOWN ON HIS VISION OF THE
ECONOMY, HIS VISION OF WHAT
WASHINGTON SHOULD AND
SHOULDN'T DO, HIS
HEALTH-CARE PLAN AND IN THE
CASE OF THE COUNTRY AT LARGE,
I THINK, IT WAS A CHOICE
THAT WAS NOT NECESSARILY ONE
THAT PEOPLE WERE WILDLY
ENTHUSIASTIC ABOUT, BUT IT
DID DIVIDE US EVEN FURTHER.
A NUMBER OF ELECTIONS HAVE
CAUSED MORE DIVISION THAN
UNITE-- UNITY.
>> JOHN, IN THE AREA SINCE
WE HAVE SEEN EVERYTHING THAT
HAPPENED IN THIS SECOND TERM
PRESIDENCY, THE FIRST YEAR
OF IT.
HAVE THOSE CHOICES BEEN
REALIZED, DO PEOPLE LOOK AT
THAT SAND SAY THIS IS WHAT
THEY VOTED FOR?
>> WELL, I THINK THE PEOPLE
VOTED FOR TO A LARGE EXTENT
F YOU THINK ABOUT THE END OF
THE ELECTION, MITT ROMNEY
WON IN THE EXIT POLLS IN
ALMOST EVERY METRIC EXCEPT
FOR THE ONE THAT MATTERED
MOST WHICH IS WITHOUT CARES
ABOUT PEOPLE LIKE ME.
SO PEOPLE VOTED FOR
PRESIDENT OBAMA TO A LARGE
EXTENT BECAUSE THEY LIKED
HIM AND TRUSTED HIM TO
IDENTIFY WITH THEIR CONCERNS,
WITH THE REAL LIVES OF REAL
PEOPLE FOR MOST AMERICAN
VOTERS.
I THINK EVEN A YEAR LATER
WITH ALL THE PROBLEMS
PRESIDENT OBAMA HAD, PEOPLE
STILL BELIEVE HE HAS THEIR
BEST INTERESTS AT HEART.
WHAT THEY LOST IS A SENSE
THAT HE IS COMPETENT AT ANY
TIME TO IMPLEMENT THE
POLICIES THAT HE'S PUT
FORWARD.
AND I THINK THAT IS THE
BIGGEST PROBLEM WITH WHAT
HAPPENED WITH HIM WITH THE
HEALTH-CARE PLAN IS PEOPLE
LOST FAITH IN HIS ABILITY TO
ACTUALLY GET THE JOB DONE.
AND TO SOME EXTENT THEY LOST
FAITH IN HIS HONESTY AND HIS
CANDOR WITH THEM.
THOSE ARE HUGE PROBLEMS FOR
HIM GOING FORWARD IN THE
COURSE OF THE NEXT THREE
YEARS.
THEY STILL FEEL HE ESTIMATE
PATH IDENTIFIES WITH HIM BUT
NOT AS WILLING TO PUT THEIR
FAITH IN HIM AS IN THE PAST
FOUR YEARS.
>> YOU FOLLOWED THE SAME
KIND OF TEMPLATE YOU DID
FOUR YEARS AGO WITH GAME
CHANGE WHICH YOU DID
EXHAUSTIVE REVIEWS OF A LOT
OF PEOPLE, 500 INTERVIEWS
FOR THIS BOOK.
AND YET PEOPLE DIDN'T REALLY
DISAGREE THAT MUCH ABOUT THE
BASIC FACTS OF HOW THIS
CAMPAIGN CAME TO BE, AND WHY
IT CAME TO BE, EVEN THOUGH
WE ALL DAYS AGREE BEFERING
ELSE RIGHT NOW.
>> WELL, IN TERMS OF THE
NARRATIVE OF THE BOOK --00
INTERVIEWS IS MORE THAN WE
WERE ABLE TO DO IN OUR DAY
JOBS AND MOST POLITICAL
JOURNALISTS ARE ABLE TO DO
THESE DAYS FOR ANY PROJECT.
AN I THINK YOU HAD IN FOR
INSTANCE, GOVERNOR ROMNEY,
CENTRAL CHARACTER OBVIOUSLY
IN THE CAMPAIGN IN OUR BOOK,
THE VERY THINGS THAT CAUSED
HIM TO BE LIMITED AS A
CANDIDATE WERE THINGS PEOPLE
IN BOTH PARTIES SAW IN
ADVANCE.
THERE WERE A LOT OF
SKEPTICISM ABOUT HIM THAT IS
WHY CHRIS CHRISTIE AND
OTHERS WERE IN THE RACE, AND
WHY YOU SAW EVEN AT THE
LOWEST POINT IN THE
PRESIDENCY, BARACK OBAMA
ANTICIPATED MITT ROMNEY
WOULD BE THE NOMINEE AND
THOUGHT I CAN TAKE THIS GUY.
THAT, THAT CONSENSUS ABOUT
WHERE GOVERNOR ROMNEY WAS
GOING TO COME UP SHORT IS
ONE OF JUST A LOT OF EXAMPLES
WHERE YOU'RE RIGHT, EVEN
THOUGH POLITICALLY THERE IS
A LOT OF DIVISION, THE AN
NIS, AND SOME OF THE
PERSONALITIES WAS
CONSISTANT.
>> WAS A PERSONALITY AND IS
THAT THE WAY WE DO OUR
DEMOCRACY NOW.
>> I THINK NOT NOW, I THINK
IS ALWAYS BEEN THAT
PERSONALITY MATTERS A LOT.
AND PERSONALITY MAKES IT
SOUND TRIVIAL BUT CHARACTER
MATTERS, RIGHT.
AND WE'VE SEEN THIS OVER
EVERY ELECTION WE EVER
COVERED, ALL OF US.
WHETHER PEOPLE BELIEVE THAT
THE CANDIDATE THEY ARE
VOTING ON ARE HONEST, HAVE
EMPATHY.
WHETHER THEY HAVE LEADERSHIP,
STRENGTH, ALL THOSE PERSONAL
CHARACTERISTICS BECAUSE AT
THE END OF THE DAY THE
PRESIDENCY UNLIKE ALMOST
EVERY OTHER OFFICE THERE IS
AN OFFICE WHERE THIS PERSON
LIVES WITH YOU IN YOUR
LIVING ROOM 24/7, 365 DAYS A
YEAR, YOU HAVE TO KIND OF
LIKE THAT PERSON AND BE
COMFORTABLE WITH HAVING THEM
IN YOUR HOME AND BE A PIECE
OF YOU EMOTIONAL OR PSYCHE
CHROJ WILL-- PSYCHOLOGICAL
FURNITURE TO VOTE FOR THEM
FOR PRESIDENT AND THAT IS
DRIVEN BY CHARACTERISTICS
AND ATTRIBUTES.
>> LET'S TALK ABOUT SOME OF
THOSE PEOPLE BECAUSE I THINK
TIMES -- SOMETIMES WE BURN
OUT OUR LEADERS, MITT ROMNEY
WAS A POTENTIAL LEADER, TIM
PAWLENTY WAS VERY MUCH
CHEERED AT ONE POINT IN THE
CAMPAIGN, PEOPLE LIKE JON
HUNTSMAN FOR A MOMENT THERE
WERE MOMENTS FOR ALL OF
THEM.
AND NOW ALL ON THE
SIDE-LINES FOREVER,
PROBABLY.
IS THAT A HEALTHY WAY TO RUN
A DEMOCRACY.
>> WE HAVE SEEN PEOPLE RUN
AND LOSE IT HAS BECOME
CONVENTIONAL WISDOM THAT
RUNNING ONCE GIVES YOU THE
EXPERIENCE, BETTER THE NEXT
TIME.
THE LAST THREE GUYS WITHOUT
WON ALL WON THEY WON THE
FIRST TIME THEY RAN, AND
GOVERNOR ROMNEY IN THIS RACE
THOUGHT YOU KNOW, I'VE GOT A
BIG ADVANTAGE OVER EVERYONE
ELSE RUNNING BECAUSE I'M
PROBABLY GOING TO BE ONE OF
THE ONLY ONES WHO HAS RUN
BEFORE.
I THINK THERE ARE SECOND
ACTS IN AMERICAN POLITICS.
LOOK AT THE PEOPLE IN OUR
BOOK.
SOME WHO DIDN'T RUN, BUT WHO
CAME RIGHT UP TO THE EDGE.
PEOPLE LIKE CHRIS CHRISTIE,
PEOPLE LIKE MIKE HUCKABEE
WHO HAS RUN ONCE BEFORE BUT
PASSED THIS TIME.
I THINK YOU SEEM IN GAME
CHANGE AND DOUBLE DOWN ONE
OF THE REALITIES OF THIS IS
PEOPLE OFTEN DON'T RUN FOR
PERSONAL REASONS.
NOT PURE POLITICAL
CALCULATION I CAN RAISE THE
MONEY OR YOU KNOW, WHO ELSE
IS RUNNING BUT A LOT OF THE
PEOPLE IN OUR BOOK DON'T RUN
FOR PERSONAL REASONS.
THEY DON'T FEEL IN THEIR GUT
IT IS THE RIGHT TIME.
THEIR WIFE DOESN'T WANT THEM
TO RUN, THEIR KIDS DON'T
WANT THEM TO RUN.
SOME CONSIDERATIONS ARE THEY
WANT TO MAKE MONEY, IT
REALLY IS PERSONAL AS
OPPOSED TO POLITICAL.
>> THERE IS ALSO A LOT OF
CONTINUITY IN SOME SENSE
THERE ARE THESE PEOPLE IN
THE 2012 RACE WHO WERE
SUPERNOVAS AND WILL PROBABLY
NEVER BE SEEN AGAIN ON THE
NATIONAL STAGE.
AT THE SAME TIME TWO OF THE
GREAT CONSTANTS IN BOTH OF
OUR BOOKS IN GAME CHANGE AND
DOUBLE DOWN HAVE BEEN BILL
AND HILLARY CLINTON WHO WERE
HUGE CHARACTERS IN BOTH OF
THOSE BOOKS AND HAVE BEEN
PARTS OF OUR NATIONAL LIFE
NOW FOR MORE THAN TWO
DECADES AND VERY WELL MAY BE
PAUT OF OUR THAT IS RIGHT
LIFE FOR ANOTHER DECADE.
>> THERE ARE THOSE WHO NEVER
SEEM TO GO AWAY, SARAH PALIN,
HADN'T GONE AWAY, JOE BIDEN
RAN FOR PRESIDENT AND NOW IS
VICE PRESIDENT FOR TWO TERMS,
HE IS TO THE GOING AWAY AND
HILLARY CLINTON.
>> WELL, LOOK THEY'RE GREAT
BRANDS IN AMERICAN POLITICS
AND ONE OF THE CONSTANTS ONE
OF THE BIG THEMES IN THIS
BOOK IS THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN OT BAMAS AND
CLINTONS.
THEY WERE WARRING PARTIES
WARRING FAMILIES IN OUR LAST
BOOK, IN THIS CYCLE PRETTY
REMARKABLE.
YOU THINK ABOUT HOW
DIFFERENT BARACK OBAMA AND
BILL CLINTON ARE, HOW
ESTRANGED THEY WERE COMING
OUT OF THE 20 O 8 ELECTION
AND IN THIS RACE A HUGE
COMING TOGETHER, KIND OF ONE
NOW JOINT POLITICAL FAMILY.
THE COURTSHIP PRESIDENT
OBAMA DOING SOMETHING, WE
WRITE ABOUT, ALMOST NEVER
DOES AT LEAST THAT WE KNOW
OF, ADMITS HE NEEDS THE HELP
OF SOMEONE ELSE.
BILL CLINTON SEEING THE
OPPORTUNITY TO HELP HIS
PARTY BUT ALSO TO KIND OF
REHABILITATE HIMSELF.
AND NOW WE HAVE THEIR JOINT
OPERATION, HILLARY CLINTON
HAS GOT A TON OF ADVANTAGES
IF SHE WANTS TO RUN IN 2016.
THE FACT THAT HER POLITICAL
FAMILY MARRIED UP WITH THE
OBAMA FAMILY IS A HUGE
BENEFIT.
>> I HAVE TO SAY ONE OF THE
INTERESTING THINGS IT SEEMS
LIKE A THEME IN THIS
INCREASINGLY EVERY FOUR
YEARS, A MONEY THEME, TO
AGREE THAT INDIVIDUALS WITH
A LOT OF MONEY CAN DETERMINE
OUTCOMES OR THINK THEY CAN
DETERMINE OUTCOMES, THE
AMOUNT OF MONEY SPPBT ON
MITT ROMNEY'S CAMPAIGN BY
INDIVIDUALS, PEOPLE
LIKE-- BY INDIVIDUALS NEWT
GINGRICH STAYED -- STAY ADD
LIVE LONGER BECAUSE OF
INDIVIDUAL SUPPORT.
DOESN'T THAT CHANGE THE
NATURE OF THE KIND OF
ELECTIONS WE HAVE.
>> IT SURE DOES.
THERE IS NO QUESTION ABOUT
THE FACT THAT IN 2012
ESPECIALLY IN THE REPUBLICAN
NOMINATION FILE THAT THOSE
WEALTHY INDIVIDUALS, STAY
ALIVE MUCH LONG NEVER THE
RACE THAN THEY WOULD HAVE
BEEN ABLE TO FOSTER FREEZE
HELPING RICK SANTORUM STAY
ALIVE LONGER THROUGH THE
SUPER PACS THAT THEY LARGELY
SELF-FUNDED.
ELONGATED THE NOMINATION
FIGHT AND MADE MITT ROMNEY
SPEND MORE RESOURCES, FIGHT
LONGER AND TALK ON MORE
WATER OVER THAT TIME.
BUT LOOK AT THE GENERAL
ELECTION WHERE TUNS OF
MILLIONS OF DOLLARS WERE
SPENT ON THE REPUBLICAN
SUPER PAC SIDE TO ALMOST NO
EFFECT WHATSOEVER.
THERE ARE TONS OF REPUBLICAN
DONORS OUT THERE, MANY RICH
MILLIONAIRES AND
BILLIONAIRES INCREDIBLY
FRUSTRATED AT THE END OF THE
DAY SAYING WE POURED MONEY
INTO KARL ROVE'S GROUP, INTO
THE CDOCH BROTHERS GROUP,
WHAT EFFECT DID IT HAVE IN
THE END, VERY LITTLE.
THERE IS NO DOUBT THERE WILL
BE A LOT OF MONEY SPENT IN
2016 BUT IT WILL BE
INTERESTING TO SEE HOW THE
PEOPLE WHO SPEND THAT MONEY
WHETHER THEY HAVE A
DIFFERENT KIND OF SCRUTINY
THEY PUT ON THOSE GROUPS,
WHETHER THEY ASK TOUGHERER
QUESTIONS W WHETHER THE GAME
IS PLAYED WITH A GREATER
DEGREE OF SOPHISTICATION AND
LESS JUST THROWING MONEY OUT
THE WINDOW THAN THERE WAS IN
2012.
>> YOU SAY HOW THE GAME IS
PLAYED.
I WONDER IF AMERICANS AREN'T
JUST SICK OF THIS AND TO THE
DEGREE THAT ELECTIONS NEVER
END.
DO THEY EVER END.
OR ARE THEY A CONSTANT, NOT
JUST THE ELECTIVE PROCESS
BUT THE WHOLE IDEA OF
CHOOSING AND JUDGING OUR
LEADERS.
>> I THINK WE SPEND A LOT OF
TIME IN THIS COUNTRY IF A
FORTUNE 500 COMPANY HAS A
OPEN JOB, THEY WILL SPEND A
LOT OF TIME F AN ANCHOR SLOT
OPENS UPING PEOPLE SEND A
LOT OF TIME LOOKING FOR
REPLACEMENT AN KERM I THINK
IT IS A BIG JOB.
I DON'T THINK THERE IS A
PROBLEM WITH A CONSTANT
RUNNING.
I THINK THE CANDIDATES
BENEFIT FROM IT.
PART WAF WORRIES ME ABOUT
SOME OF THE PEOPLE WHO RAN
IN 2012 AND SOME OF THE
PEOPLE LOOKING AT 2016 IS
THEY HAVEN'T SPENT YEARS OUT
THERE MEETING PEOPLE AROUND
THE COUNTRY, GETTING
UNDERSTANDING IN DIFFERENT
REGIONS OF THE COUNTRY.
BILL CLONE TON, RONALD
REAGAN SPENT YOU KNOW DECADES
IN THE POLITICAL VINEYARDS.
>> ARE YOU SAYING IT IS A
NECESSARY THING.
>> I THINK IT IS GOOD FOR
THE CANDIDATES, GOOD FOR THE
COUNTRY.
I WOULD RATHER GET TO KNOW
PEOPLE OVER TIME, NOT IN A
RUSHED WAY.
FOLLOW THE NFL 12 MONTHS A
YEAR PRETTY MUCH.
THINK WE COUNTRY MUSIC 12
CAN HANDLE THIS.
>> SPEAK FOR YOURSELF.
JOHN, FINAL WORD.
>> I THINK ALL THAT IS TRUE.
I HAVE TO DISAGREE-- I THINK
IT IS A LITTLE BIT WORRYING
WHEN YOU SEE BARACK OBAMA
COME OUT OF THE 2012 RACE
AND PEOPLE TALK ABOUT HIM
HAVING YOU KNOW A NINE MONTH
WINDOW IN HIS WHOLE SECOND
TERM TO GET ANYTHING DONE
BEFORE MIDTERM POLITICS
FIRST AND THEN PRESIDENTIAL
POLITICS SECOND WILL BLOW
EVERYTHING ELSE OUT OF THE
WATER AND MAKE IT IMPOSSIBLE
TO GET BUSINESS DONE IN
WASHINGTON D.C.
THE COUNTRY FACES HUGE
PROBLEMS AND THOSE PROBLEMS
HAVE BEEN REALLY HARD TO
SOLVE FOR A LONG TIME.
TO GIVE UP A RE-ELECTED
PRESIDENT WHO WON WITH A BIG
MANDATE, IN THE SENSE OF A
BIG ELECTORAL COLLEGE MARGIN,
5 MILLION VOTES IN THE
POPULAR ELECTORATE, TO GIVE
THAT PERSON NINE MONTHS TO
GET A BUDGET DEAL DONE TO
IMPLEMENT HEALTH-CARE REFORM
TO GET IMMIGRATION REFORM
DONE, THAT SEEMS LIKE A
NARROW WINDOW TO HAVE A TIME
OF GOVERNANCE AND THAT IS
THE ONE PART THAT SEEMS
UNFORTUNATE TO ME.
>> JOHN HEILEMANN OF "NEW
YORK" MAGAZINE, MARK PAL
HERIN OF "TIME" MAGAZINE,
THE AUTHORS OF DOUBLE DOWN,
THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, GWEN.
>> Sreenivasan: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
A SECOND SUICIDE BOMBING IN TWO
DAYS HIT VOLGOGRAD, RUSSIA,
KILLING 14 PEOPLE.
IT RAISED NEW QUESTIONS ABOUT
RUSSIAN READINESS FOR THE WINTER
OLYMPICS IN SOCHI, JUST SIX
WEEKS AWAY.
THE GOVERNMENT OF AFGHANISTAN
REJECTED A U.S. INTELLIGENCE
FINDING THAT MANY OF THE GAINS
THERE COULD BE LOST BY 2017.
AND EAST AFRICAN NATIONS WARNED
THEY'LL MOVE TO DEFEAT THE REBEL
LEADER IN SOUTH SUDAN, UNLESS HE
ACCEPTS A CEASE-FIRE.ON THE "NET
NOW, WHY DO WE DROP A BALL ON
NEW YEAR'S EVE?
WE TRACK THE EVOLUTION FROM
MARITIME SIGNAL TO TODAY'S 12-
FOOT CRYSTAL AND L.E.D. LIGHT
TIMES SQUARE BALL.
MEANWHILE IN OTHER CITIES, THE
BALL HAS TRANSFORMED INTO A
GIANT PEACH, A GUITAR AND A
SARDINE.
WE HAVE A SLIDE SHOW OF THE MANY
DIFFERENT AMERICAN VARIATIONS ON
THE TRADITION.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
AND THAT'S THE "NEWSHOUR" FOR
TONIGHT.
ON TUESDAY, A RECORD YEAR FOR
WALL STREET, BUT THE BROADER
ECONOMY DIDN'T SHARE THE WEALTH.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE "PBS
NEWSHOUR", THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.